everyone Laszlo Montgomery here with the
exciting conclusion of our little
overview of the Chinese Civil War as we
begin this episode early 1949 the last
of the three great campaigns of 1948 49
the pingjin is over and practically all
of China north of the Yangtze is in CCP
hands as 1949 dawned there was this hope
among many in China that their country's
long slide from greatness that began in
the 1830s was finally coming to an end
for more than a century the Chinese
people had witnessed and experienced
national suffering on a mass scale and
political humiliation at the hands of
more powerful nations the cities and the
countryside had witnessed some of the
20th century's worst cases of man's
inhumanity to man and finally since
about the time of the daoguang emperor
this pain and suffering seemed like it
was just about coming to an end after
the three great campaigns of 1948 the
liao shun quite high in pingjin there
was this air of inevitability now about
an ultimate CCP victory and that the
times they were a-changin there was this
lull in the action right after the ping
Jain campaign came to an end in January
1949 man these guys were exhausted the
CCP and KMT armies had been mauling each
other for three hard years since 1946
the PLA have taken the north and now it
was time to go conquer the rest of China
and this involved crossing the Yangtze
River I've said it many times in pass
CHP episodes this long river always
served as the geographic boundary
dividing China in half these two regions
north and south of this river and it
first developed independently of each
other and then later the two distinct
cultures became one we saw in the CHP
111 episode covering the wolf State one
of the ways this happened
things were looking grim er than ever
before for the KMT but John kai-shek he
was like the Black Knight and Monty
Python and the Holy Grail no matter how
beaten he was he just pretend like the
white high campaign only caused a
scratch he spent much of 1949 flying all
over China to meet with his generals and
loyalists in his most desperate hours
and they were quite a few in 1949 he
even flew to the Philippines in South
Korea to try and rally the
anti-communist leading governments there
to his defense from his diaries and he
was a prolific diarist it was clear
ji-yong knew the end was coming but he
didn't give up just yet as I mentioned
there was this few month lull between
the end of the pingjin campaign in
January 49 and the crossing of the
Yangtze in April first of all with the
job now finished in the north and in
Manchuria Lin Yao didn't need to stick
around up there to move a massive army
from the north of China down into the
heartland required a little time so
these few months gave Lin the time he
needed to get into place to enter the
next and hopefully final phase of this
civil war ma bided his time in XI by paw
toying with China's acting president li
zongren he made this great show of
willingness to cooperate and find some
kind of reasonable settlement but Mao of
course no intention of ever cutting a
deal with acting President Lee or anyone
from the KMT lead song Ren didn't have
much to bargain with except the
willingness to go quietly which would
mitigate the potential bloodshed there
was gonna be no question that the answer
had to be crushed and back in 1949 this
was no narrow stream that was easy for
one person to cross let alone an army of
well over a million men Chinese deputy
suyu was tasked with coming up with a
plan he had to figure out how to cross
where to cross and when to put Li Tong
Ren's feet to the
fire Mao came up with his terms for
surrender this so-called eight-point
plan was harsh didn't offer the
Nationalists any brakes and why should
he offer them any wiggle room
well he had them right where he wanted
them damned if they did damned if they
didn't the eight points of surrender
were won punish all war criminals to
abolishing the 1947 Constitution three
abolishing the kmt's whole legal system
for reorganizing the nationalist armies
five confiscation of all government
capital six land reform seven abolishing
all treasonous treaties and eight
convene a political consultative
conference to form a coalition
government President Lee had sent a
peace mission to miles headquarters and
she by paul hoby this mix of negotiators
weren't holding too many aces up their
sleeves so in the end they just signed
off on all eight points this didn't go
over too well with leads on ran and it
certainly wasn't welcome news when
Chiang kai-shek heard of it they thought
a deal could be struck after Mao gave
Lee song ran five days to accept or else
Lee told miles negotiators to go stuff
it and that became the official pretext
to cross the Yangtze and launch the
invasion of the south on April 20th 1949
leads on Ren's refusal to play ball
under mouths rules was the mechanism
that got everything going the PLA had
more than a million and a half soldiers
camped out on the north banks of the
anza according to sue use plans there
were to be three advance groups that
would cross the yang suit at three
different locales these three places
would be at hukou near Jo Cheung in
Shanxi province as well as Chang in
north of Russia and pouco across from
the capital in Nanjing these three
advance groups were led by the same
go-to guys that all the big jobs went to
Chen Yi Lin Bo and lil watch hung the
crossing of the yarns
while this is one of the great historic
and theatrical moments the whole civil
war if you remember from that thumb
shellping series
Ezra Vogel had mentioned that dung
considered this one of his greatest
moments ever
in some places were the PLA crossed the
whole thing went without incident no one
was there to stop them they just crossed
300,000 PLA troops crossed over a
24-hour period in other places it was
like Saving Private Ryan nationalist
troops lined up on the south side just
mowing down the crossing PLA with heavy
doses of machine-gun fire but the
crossing of the Yang's ax was done and
then a few days later on April 23rd Lin
Biao forces entered Nanjing the capital
of the Republic of China all traces of
KMT soldiers had left the city the mayor
had left the city by car taking with him
300 million Chinese here and once he got
out of the city though his bodyguards
beat him up and ripped him off for all
the cash and left him on the side of the
road then the negotiating team that lee
seong ran had sent to discuss surrender
terms ended up defecting to the
communists and that was that acting
president leads on Rennes recognizing
the inevitable flood of PLA troops into
Nanjing had first fled to hangzhou from
there he implored young kai-shek Tests
sent help and get back in the fight
Jiang had done little to support Lee
after he had gone and dumped the
nation's troubles in his lap after all
what could jung do send what forces the
Generalissimo had seemingly by this time
lost all his will to fight and more
often than not whatever leap song Ren
would order would soon after be
countermanded by Chen after the PLA took
Nanjing there was a famous story about
how dunk Hsiao paying and Chagny were
both goofin on Jean kai-shek having fun
sitting in the Generalissimo
presidential chair in the palace after
it got too hot for Lee Chong Ren in
Hangzhou he flew to his stronghold of
Guang XI
town of kweli and he was a former
warlord from that region
like many warlords he had thrown his lot
in with Chun at the KMT before the
northern expedition li clue next to
Guangzhou trying to run the government
from there so lead song Ren despite his
best efforts couldn't get a handle on
the situation and besides what if we
tried to do li zongren was often stymied
by ji-yong who seemingly work
systematically against the Acting
President once Guangzhou was taken by
the PLA Li went to Chongqing and it's
there in that former wartime capital
where lead song Ren and the KMT
government made their last stand but by
this time this this guanxi warlord and
KMT general and now Acting President of
the ROC had had enough he decided at
this point throw in the towel surrender
to his bleeding ulcers and then he flew
to the Big Apple to have his duodenal
problems checked out at New York
Presbyterian Hospital the civil war was
over for him while all this drama was
going on something goes down in the
middle of the Yangtze River that sent a
nice little shock wave that was felt in
many western capitals this was known as
the Youngs incident now over the course
of four thousand years of Chinese
history probably many incidents happened
on that thirty nine hundred mile long
river so for something to go down in
history as the Youngs incident it had to
be big well it wasn't really that big
and maybe some of my British listeners
might be familiar with it Mao was
paranoid as hell that in crossing the
Yang's ax and then going in for the kill
this was gonna trigger an immediate
American response that would come at the
last second and spoil everything for him
so he had to send a signal to the
imperialists that he meant business just
as the Communists were ready to carry
out this crossing of the yawns a british
gunboat the hms amethyst was heading
from Shanghai to Nanjing carrying a load
of supplies to the British Embassy on
April 20th 1949
right around the city of junggeun a PLA
mortar battery opened fire on the vessel
when Mao was told of an imperialist
gunboat sailing up the yonder near to
where he planned to cross he said I
don't think so
Mao wanting to show these imperialist
days were over gave orders to sue you to
fire on the amethyst as well as the
frigate HMS concert that had rushed to
her aid actually he was going to tell
general Tsui to hold fire but it was
already too late during the firefight
the amethyst ran aground mid-river on a
sandbank
Mao then told sue you to wait and see if
they tried anything funny before he
opened up on them again around fifty
British were killed or wounded in the
confrontation on April 28 1949 the
four-year anniversary of Mussolini's
death Mao had told his generals quote
the incidence with the British warships
have shaken the world and became the
headlines of all the main newspapers in
Britain and America
well not that the PRC was established
yet but this wasn't the best way to
start two new sino-british relations but
Mao was looking to make a point to these
Western powers who he feared were
possibly looking to cause trouble and he
used this incident with the HMS amethyst
on the Yuans ax to make his point each
time the ship tried to do something to
make a getaway pla batteries would open
up on it for ten weeks the pla guarded
this beleaguered british vessel as
negotiations between the two sides took
place in fact one of the men involved in
the negotiations was someone we
discussed in the history of Hong Kong
part 10 episode this was Hong Kong's
future 26 governor Sir Edward yodh his
attempts at negotiating the release of
the amethyst with the PLA all came to
naught then on the evening of July 30th
1949 the amethyst made a daring attempt
to escape the vessel began heading east
towards relative safety in Shanghai a
hundred and four miles away right now
the Yuans on both sides of the river
belonged to the Communists so they had
to make a very nerve-racking attempt to
make it out alive the amethyst followed
a passing merchant ship called the Kyung
Ling liberation they stayed close to
this vessel using it for cover hoping
that it wouldn't attract much of any
notice especially so late at night but
no such lock they were spotted and in
the confusion that youngling liberation
was sunk suffering many losses by the
morning however the amethyst had made
its tense and amazing getaway to Bao
Shan and Woosung at the mouth of the
anza this daring getaway was led by
Lieutenant Commander John Karin's
Karan's would later be portrayed by
actor and World War 2 vet Richard Todd
in the 1957 British film the Youngs
incident after a very intense escape the
amethyst headed south along the china
coast to safety in Hong Kong the message
sent by Carens was sorta worth repeating
after he had made his mad dash to safety
he signaled to a British vessel quote
have rejoined the fleet south of Wu song
no damage no casualties god save the
king unquote as the pla flooded the zone
south of the young the Nationalists made
their final stand in Chongqing once the
Yang's that had been crossed and the
defeat became more imminent the KMT led
government from Chiang kai-shek to lead
song Ren and all the way down to the
last man began to self-destruct at a
faster rate you know the KMT leadership
both politically and militarily was
always a rather fragmented lot john
kai-shek was never a chairman mao as far
as commanding loyalty when one smile was
in charge following the long march that
was it he was in charge and he didn't
have to constantly look over his
shoulder for some Brutus or Cassius
amongst his followers not John kai-shek
he hardly trusted any
and his generals had their own personal
alliances and rivalries and business
interests too they had thrown their lot
in with this one or that one and now at
this eleventh hour as the entire house
of cards was collapsing everyone was
literally running for their lives or
looking for a safe place to hide out
well after Nanjing fell the next two big
places to go were nan Chung in Jung XI
and Hangzhou and judgin Hangzhou back
then was about a one or two day march to
Xiang high so that city was buckling
down for the imminent arrival of the PLA
there was this dread about their arrival
into the city but at the same time a lot
of Shanghainese capitalists who chose to
remain behind felt despite the fears of
many that no matter what their social
class would still be necessary under the
new regime the wheels of commerce and
international trade would be as
important in the new China as it had
always been so a lot of Shanghainese
rather than desert the sinking ship
decided to stick around and sit on the
fence to see what their fate might be
under the Communists anyone who had
somewhere else to go by this time in
April May 1949 was already long gone
many believe that regardless of their
perceived value under the new regime the
talons of Leninism were going to
penetrate too deeply and it was besting
get out while the going was not
necessarily good but better than it was
shaping up to be it was also this time
March April May of 1949 that thousands
of stateless Europeans including so many
jews who had found refuge in shanghai
were desperately searching for some
country any country to come to their aid
and grant them passports to nations in
particular that came forward were the
Philippines in Costa Rica the man tasked
with defending Shanghai for the
Nationalists was general Tong unbought
Tong unball was one of John kai-shek's
main generals not only for fighting the
Communists but the
japanese as well during the war of
resistance Jang wasn't entirely trusting
of tongue after tongue had informed on
his teacher and fellow nationalist army
stalwart Chen Yi Chun as we discussed
before in part one of the series was the
one in charge during the 228 incident
that went down in the streets of Taipei
after Tung unbought and formed young
that Cheung Yee had approached him about
defecting to the Communist side Jian
immediately arrested Chun and he was
later executed
you'd think Tong gun boy might have
earned a modicum of trust from cks for
informing on Chen yi but instead the
suspicious Jian mistrusted Tong more
than ever and kept a close eye on him as
the pla started to close in on Shanghai
in May of 1949 word got out that general
Tong through his intermediaries had made
a down payment on a 22 room mansion in
Tokyo that in John's eyes revealed his
duplicity and Jang is gonna wonder if
Tong unbossed secret plans to flee to
Japan had any relationship with how easy
Shanghai ended up falling to the
Communists even do us young himself who
provided all that local muscle that
carried out the Shanghai massacre all
those years ago even he was trying to
cut some kind of deal with the
Communists Joe and Lai who by this time
had seen everything was completely
amazed at big air dues audacity Tong
unbought tried his best to hold on to
Shanghai for the Nationalists everything
by now was spiraling out of control as
far as even a minor semblance of
normalcy by now there was no currency if
he wanted to carry out a financial
transaction big or small only gold would
do at this point just before the pla
came to liberate the city to show who
was in charge and perhaps to do
something desperate rather than just sit
around and wait tongue on ball took a
page out of big air dues book and
carried out a mini shanghai massacre
of his own some of you may have seen
these photos and black-and-white videos
of these squads out in the street
forcing young students presumably
communist sympathizers down on their
knees right in the middle of the streets
and in job a park popping them right in
the back of the head it was like the
last days of Berlin in World War two
Saigon in April of 75 gangs of these
soldiers were sent out executing anyone
and everyone that could get their hands
on who wasn't on the KMT side there were
even these anti-communist parades
organized on the Bund to try and shore
up whatever remaining support there was
for the nationalist government there had
been this hope that the transfer of
power in Shanghai that everyone knew
would happen
what happened peacefully without any
shots being fired all kinds of secret
talks were going on that might
facilitate this but then at the end of
April just as there seemed a peaceful
transfer might take place john kai-shek
flew into shanghai vowing to defend the
city to the end and all hopes for this
peaceful regime change in China's most
important City went out the window
young only stayed a short time and left
again on May 8th but his presence there
and attempts at rallying the forces did
its damage it was at this time when all
hopes of a peaceful and easy transition
went south that do young cashed in his
chips and fled the country flying to
Hong Kong where he would die a couple
years later many say from all the
long-term effects of the life of
depravity he lived for over two decades
so the communist forces awaiting their
marching orders paused as their leaders
chuggy
and thunk Xiao ping figured out what to
do they didn't want to fight their way
into the city and cause all kinds of
mass casualties and all the political
fallout that goes with that in the end
the Shanghai business community had to
pass the Hat to raise enough funds to
pay Tung unball off to get out of
Shanghai
tongue headed to Guangzhou and his army
did its best to disappear into the
masses of crowds there were some
skirmishes on the outskirts of the city
that slowed down the taking of Shanghai
but take it the PLA did on May 25th at
the stroke of midnight the PLA camped
outside the city began marching in
peacefully there was no resistance as
they entered arguably China's greatest
and most important city in the 20th
century the day before a huge portrait
of Chairman Mao had been hung right on
the marquee of the great world
Entertainment Centre on Yin honest sheet
song roads right where today's dahshur G
s station is located this building had
served as the city's premier
entertainment and amusement Center since
1917 there's also a story that mentioned
the greatest star of the day the
ravishingly beautiful yen way Joo who it
was told shed all her glamour and came
out into the streets dressed like a
commoner too enthusiastically greet the
PLA soldiers personally she was amongst
those who decided not to flee and to
embrace the CCP but 17 years later in
1966 she will be hounded into committing
suicide during the Cultural Revolution
the disciplined cadres all fanned out
throughout the city taking over
government buildings seizing any KMT
documents and figuring out where all the
levers of power were so they could start
controlling them it was sort of a great
cultural moment to is all these PLA
soldiers who for the most part we're not
educated city dwellers from Chang soo
young they were mostly illiterate
northerners from north of that long
river and for them to march into this
magnificent city with all its marble
limestone and all the most modern
technologies and conveniences and all of
China just made their jaws drop and
these sophisticated urbanites
just got a kick out of these worn out
looking battle-hardened Hicks from the
countryside carrying their guns and
refusing offers for cigarettes or any
kind of gift they hardly looked like the
Menace that they had been told to expect
in fact despite their weapons that they
carried these PLA soldiers seemed rather
harmless in the eyes of these city folk
well the guy who was made Shanghai's
first mayor was none other than Changi
himself you could see his statue today
located on the choicest part of the bun
the part where all the tourists
congregate when Chagny enters Shanghai
on that fateful day in May the statue
that occupied that space was none other
than Sir Robert Hart will be featured in
episode CHP 58 amazingly enough after
very strict measures that were backed up
with a few bullets to the back of the
head and after a new currency was
launched Shanghai began to bounce back
quite fast there's nothing else the
world of commerce dislikes more than
uncertainty but after a short period
things look like they were going to
recover just fine there was an old story
that's mentioned in most of the sources
I read hang on boy ordered this huge
moat to be built outside Shanghai that
utilized a vast amount of wood in
conscripted labour he was building this
moat ostensibly to hold back the pla
bearing down on Shanghai
however the real story seems to be that
tongue on boy had this relative and the
timber or building materials business
have needed to get rid of all this wood
and turn it into cash so he could make
his getaway to Taiwan or wherever
let me quote Jonathan Spence regarding
what happened after the fall of Shanghai
quote in the following months the
Communist armies moved to consolidate
their hold with a speed for which there
had been no parallel since the victories
of the Manchus and their Chinese
collaborators in 1645 16 46 in 1949
there was plenty of action going on
elsewhere
Punda why had his band on the road as
well taking xi'an first on May 20th
heading westwards towards Shin Jung
Poong de wises mission was to take Gansu
ningxia and Ching hai this meant he had
to go head-to-head against one of the
most reliable and fiercest KMT generals
hodong non he hadn't quit the fight yet
hoot song 9 you remember was the one who
led the forces that took yen on and
chased Mao ultimately to his new base
and she by paw also fighting alongside
hutong nan on the KMT side was someone
we discussed in an old chp episode
number 78 on the xi base on ma the
warlord Maz of the northwest this was
one of the main maas ma bufang
his turf was Ching hai province he and
another of the main maas my home quake
they joined hands late in the game to
fight the Communists and keep them out
of the Northwest after Punk's forces had
taken Xian they took a big loss at
bouchy just west of Xian losing 15,000
in that battle two forces led by ma
bufang cousin my home quake if you
recall from that warlord MOC leaked
episode these guys was tough as nails
and not the easy pushovers that was so
often the case when the pla fought
against the NRA despite putting up a
good fight ma bufang
forces were ultimately unable to stop
Hong's army so after lanzhou was taken
in August ma bufang saw the writing on
the wall he knew it was over for him as
far as his fortunes in China were
concerned the ma family going back to
the patriarchs watch on all my chin lien
mah hai Yin had done well for themselves
in northwest china since the days of the
way minority war of 1862 to 1877 by 1949
though their luck had run out so good
old reliable pongo who i accomplished
his mission mapathon fled first to
Chongqing firm Chongqing ma bufang flew
to Hong
and then to Taiwan he remained a KMT
party stalwart until his dying day 1975
after lanzhou was taken and gotten su
belong to the Communists
Pung snek stop on the tour was in Xin
Jiang where he accepted the surrender of
the KMT armies there in September Lin Bo
in the meantime was making all kinds of
progress mopping up in the heartland
after he took Changsha and Hunan on
August 22nd he headed due south marching
towards Guangzhou after Mao had already
stood at the Tiananmen podium on 10:1
Lin Biao took both shaman and Guangzhou
on October 28th up to that point shaman
had been the main jumping-off point to
anyone looking for greener pastures in
Taiwan now the place belonged to the
Communists and that way out of Dodge was
now closed
well that sort of went like this one by
one all these places were taken guacho
by mid-november and then finally the
last bastion of the republic of china
the city of Chongqing was taken by
December 1st after jung kai-shek left
Shanghai on May 8th he had flown to
Taiwan to go see how things were going
back in the days of the sino-japanese
war Jang was often accused of not
fighting the Japanese in order to
preserve his troop strength against the
Communists now in this late stage as the
PLA was finishing off the job and total
collapse of the nationalist command
structure had already happened john was
now being accused of not fighting the
Communists for the sake of preserving
his troops for the ultimate move to
Taiwan by now of course Jang knew this
is where he was gonna end up he knew he
would need to stay in Taiwan until he
could get his act together
carry out some major political and
social reform try and snag the USA into
backing him again and then when the time
was right
invade China and put everything back to
the way it was before Japan came and
ruined
everything in the 1930s his guy there in
Taiwan was Chun Chun who he had made
governor Chung and Chung spent some time
together holed up in young Ming Shan
discussing how things had go on up till
now and planned for the future
utilizing their green gang links to the
very end it was the strong backs of
these gangsters that loaded up all the
treasures wealth and assets that could
be ferried out of China and shipped to
Taiwan they did an absolutely superb job
of emptying the coffers and taking
anything of value to the island that
wasn't nailed down Taiwan had been
softened up since the 228 incident that
we spoke of earlier once it became a
foregone conclusion that Taiwan was in
John's future the place needed to be
totally set up so that when the end came
John could step out of one pair of shoes
and into another
unfortunately the KMT takeover of the
island was a violent one Zhang kai-shek
had given this task to Chun Yi who was
promptly relieved of duty soon after he
accomplished his mission Jiang needed a
hard-ass like China to do the dirty job
of pacifying any resistance on Taiwan
against the kmt regime but once this was
more or less accomplished john put more
moderate people in place and as i said
young ended up executing chummy after
tang unborn formed on him
zhang had dumped all the problems of the
government on li zongren so that he
could focus on this next phase of the
republic of china
he knew that after shanghai fell the
mass exodus of mainlanders to taiwan was
going to be huge
and these mainlanders jung considered
his core base so the more who came the
better the Japanese had already primed
the pump as far as putting most of the
necessary infrastructure in place this
was going to be very convenient for the
KMT takeover of the levers of power Jang
ended up fleeing to Taiwan on December
10th 1949 when Tong Xiao ping and his
arm he got too close for comfort in
Chongqing Jang fluid
once to Chengdu and it's there that the
Generalissimo Chiang kai-shek with dongs
forces closing in on this Sichuan
capital finally used that one-way ticket
to Taipei that he had always kept safe
in his back pocket whilst in Chengdu
just before fleeing John gave orders to
execute every single one of his
political opponents whoever was in KMT
custody or whoever could be got at with
the exception of several pacification
campaigns to put down pockets of
resistance and xin zhang and tibet in
1950 it was all over as far as the
chinese civil war was concerned Mao
Zedong had already written about the way
it was gonna be from now on remember he
had called for this consultative
conference in September this body
churned out what was known as the common
program the Gong Tong Gong Li this
common program was mouths blueprints for
the brave new world that he was planning
on building Mao called for the broad
masses to all join together to build
this United Front that would be led by
the working class everybody was going to
be in on this the peasants the petty
bourgeoisie in the National portion see
as well they too were invited to get in
on the action so all these groups
together like I said would join with the
workers who would lead the whole thing
and this would form what was known as
the People's Democratic dictatorship and
you know who would lead them get it this
was mouths big picture as he started to
move ahead with implementation of things
that had been up to now so easy to
theorize about on paper while still in
sheep I Pau Mao had met with Stalin's
man Anastas Mikoyan and those two used
that time to work out the whole
blueprint for the future sino-soviet
cooperation in these very productive
meetings in early 1949 not only did they
discuss
brass tacks with regard to the nature of
the relationship but also regarding
their future cooperation on the
international stage Mao still hadn't had
his face-to-face
sit-down with Stalin much to his
frustration but he felt okay in the
afterglow of these meetings with McCoy
on Mao decided in the spring of 1949
that the time had come to stop roughing
it in sheep I Pau and so he started
heading in the direction of Beijing
it was Mao who acted as the decider
regarding where the leadership would
cluster itself mile decided they would
live inside the historic jounin high
compound adjacent to the Forbidden City
therefore he called for his people to
get the whole place fixed up and readied
for the eventual arrival of the new
nation's highest leaders while the CCP
strongman high compound was being built
Mao set up temporary digs in the
fragrant hills west of Beijing there he
waited with all his men until September
when the leadership compound was
completed then mom moved into Chunin
high and prepared for his big
announcement he wanted to wait to
proclaim the founding of the new nation
until October the month that the Russian
Revolution had taken place and the Xin
hai revolution as well October 1st 1949
was a cold day in Beijing Mao was going
to make his symbolic announcement on the
gates of heavenly peace and declare that
the Chinese people had stood up and the
People's Republic of China was founded
there were plenty of places with an
iSight on the podium were a sniper with
a high-power rifle could build a nest
and at the right moment pick off China's
new leaders on the podium one by one the
security detail was frantic trying to
convince Mao to do something a little
more low-key but despite the risks Mao
wouldn't be swayed this was too symbolic
and too perfect of a place for what he
was about to say he was going to follow
in the footsteps of men like Leo pang
we sure mean Chou Quan Yin & Zhu
Yuanzhang for something this big mal
figured he'd take his chances back then
Tiananmen Square wasn't the size that it
is today depending on which version you
read either tens of thousands or
hundreds of thousands showed up to here
Mouse speak those historic words Mao
appeared on this tenement viewing
platform many times over the course of
the next 27 years that he would rule
China
he'd utter the occasional slogans or
witty phrase but this speech that he
gave on October 1st 1949 would be the
only one he would ever give atop the
gate of heavenly peace so Mao hid his
great moment and the PRC was established
it'll be the 64th anniversary this year
this was also Mouse first moment in
front of such a big crowd once source I
read mentioned that he wasn't well that
day and that the Chairman was often very
uncomfortable around people he wasn't
familiar with so he was a little tense
and nervous and couldn't relax the
fighting in China would carry on until
1950 and then so soon into the history
of the PRC and October of that year
China would send troops to fight against
American soldiers in Korea you know
after the fall of Xu Zhuo during the
white high campaign between a thousand
and two thousand survivors of the KMT
army made their way west through su
chuan Yunnan and into North Burma to the
Shan State from this base these X KMT
soldiers using guerrilla tactics tried a
couple times to invade your nun without
success
this group later came to the attention
of the American CIA who by 1951 was
sending aid to these former white high
campaign survivors using them as a
ragtag first line of defense against any
possible incursions by Mao into
Southeast Asia basically these guys set
himself up in Burma got into the opium
trade and later on a guy
Jang Shifu came along and would train
under them and this person Jang Shifu
became more well known as the opium king
queen Shah that was one little legacy of
the Chinese civil war among so many and
so me little beauties as Professor Bob
in Kansas City always says I hope you
enjoyed that the history of the war of
liberation or the Chinese Revolution or
Chinese Civil War whatever you want to
call it it's a great story it serves as
the final exclamation point to the end
of China's century of humiliation in
past episodes of the CHP we have looked
at many of the things that have happened
in China since 1949 so I'm good some bad
it's hard to believe when you look at
China today with all its achievements
and power that less than a century
before the nation was a fragmented
basket case on its knees powerless to
defend itself against imperialists and
Japanese might so knowing a little about
what went down in China during the past
100 years truly can act as an ideal lens
to view a lot of the issues we all read
about today in the context of more than
4,000 years of history essentially is
nothing not even 2% so that's about it
only took four episodes to tell this
story because I left out about 90% of
the details there are a boatload of
sidebars and other stories that I didn't
mention in this series for example and
listener hunter pointed this out the
whole episode of Jon kai-shek's son and
successor as president of the roc Jiang
Cheng hua and his 12-year stint in the
Soviet Union a hostage / guest of Joseph
Stalin I'm gonna cover all this when I
do the jam ching-kuo episode 4 lovers of
military strategy and hour by hour
timelines of each and every battle there
is plenty for you to munch on contained
in these four episodes were merely an
overview of what happened there are
plenty of books out there that fill in
all the fascinating details about
what was going on and nanjing beijing
yen on chongqing taipei shanghai and she
by paw so for anyone whose appetite has
not been sufficiently satiated i
encourage you to go read up or there's
also a ton of videos on the subject of
the civil war that you could find on
youtube and yoku that's all i have for
you this time
this is Laszlo Montgomery signing off
from yes the birthplace of Jung kai-shek
good old Ningbo China well he was
actually from Chicco but not too far
away from where I'm sitting I'm here
once again visiting the head office be
back in Claremont mid month so from
everyone here at the China history
podcast our fine dedicated staff of
researchers writers editors and
brilliant engineers I hope you'll join
us next time for another exciting
episode of the China history podcast